nearly every seaside village has its
stories of mysterious shipwrecks and
ghost ships legends that have been
passed down from one generation to the
next
most are easily dismissed as tall tales
that grow taller by the year but there
are also some otherworldly sightings
that defy rational explanation and leave
sailors wondering whether they've
entered the realm of the supernatural
join us for go ships
July 17th 1996 it's a warm summer's
night on Long Island people are outside
for a stroll or sailing peacefully along
the shoreline TWA flight 800 takes off
from New York's John F Kennedy Airport
loaned for Paris at 8:30 p.m. in the
dark sky two and a half miles above the
earth the giant 747 explodes in a fiery
flash
all 230 people aboard die
the official conclusion of the National
Transportation Safety Board is that a
spark in the fuel system caused the
explosion but Thomas Stalcup an
independent investigator disagrees
Stalcup has learned that eyewitnesses
reported a bright streak shooting up
from the water towards the jumbo jet
102 people saw this thing go up 96 said
it came from the surface Stalcup and
others acquire 30 minutes of radar data
from the NTSB investigation and make a
startling discovery here's the debris
field right here and you can see that
all the debris is falling in this
general area and directly below the
debris field you'll see this is the
closest ship to the crash and it headed
in a south southeast direction
approximately 30 knots and this ship
according to the FBI has not been
identified this ship of unknown origin
appearing as a radar blip may be the
source of the mysterious streak of light
there are reports from multiple
eyewitnesses that a ship was directly
below a flight hunter when it exploded
these eye witnesses saw what looked like
a light on the horizon after the crash
however that light went out according to
one eyewitness in the official report
the unidentified ship has no relation to
the real and known disaster of flight
and the questions raised by Stahl cups
mystery she may never be answered they
remain riddles added to a centuries-old
collection of inexplicable seafaring and
meekness
there's a whole realm of ghostly
folklore at sea starting with
forerunners which are ghostly
predictions of disaster and there's a
rich tradition of those founded on the
very fear of all those unpredictable
horrible things that happen at sea since
man first took to the Seas the open
ocean has been as mysterious and alien
as outer space sailors who have thought
themselves mightier than the seas have
paid a terrible price
after Columbus discovers that you
sailing vessels begin to criss cross the
vast oceans in search of new lands and
good riches
Mariners seeking the silk and spices of
the Far East sail around the southern
tip of Africa the Cape of Good Hope
often battered by severe storms and
navigating the Cape is a most
treacherous undertaking here legend says
he's born the story of the most famous
of all ghost ships the Flying Dutchman
her story begins in 1680 when a Dutch
captain named Philip van der Decken
swears of curse against God that he'll
succeed in rounding the Cape if he has
to keep trying until Judgment Day
the ship and her crew never returned
home
but they are seen again not as flesh and
bone Norwood in canvas but as a spectral
vision a seagoing ghost
sailors returning home and teller seeing
the flying dutchman under cursed cou
often before experiencing a disaster of
their own they have passed down the tale
that no soul aboard the Dutchman can
rest unless another sailor takes its
place
what fate awaits Souls lost at sea this
amazing photograph provides an eerie
glimpse at the possibility of something
beyond our normal view of the world
in 1924 two seaman James Courtney and
Michael Meehan died in a tragic accident
aboard the tanker SS Watertown following
their burial at sea their faces appear
in the roiling water alongside the ship
the captain grabs his camera and
captures their images are these ghostly
specters the last attempt of The
Departed to communicate a farewell to
their shipmates what looks like their
faces are clearly visible in this 1924
photograph
are there other worlds are there fourth
dimensions I'm not afraid to say I don't
know people disappear
they've been disappearing for hundreds
of years and these ships show up and I
think it's an incredible mystery we
continue a 19th century ghost ship
the teaser still appears to this day in
Mahone Bay Nova Scotia
I kept saying oh I just can't believe
this we got to make sure other people
see this but there it was in living
color investigators of mysterious events
have found that 80% are miss
identification hoaxes or mistakes that
leaves 1 out of every 5 in the realm of
the unexplained mysteries mysteries
we'll be right back here on the History
Channel we now return to ghost chips on
history's mysteries in 1813 the United
States is at war with Great Britain
to help fight the powerful British Navy
the US government grants American
civilian vessels the authority to attack
British ships these ships are called
privateers
the government license or letter makes
these sailors in effect pilots
so you get these very dramatic chases
that last hours sometimes days of one
vessel trying to sail another finally
they draw near enough within cannon
range and the privateer usually only
fires a few shots across the battle of
the enemy vessel and that's usually in
most privateering battles it's a
remarkably bloodless form of warfare
usually you're attacking merchant ships
I don't have a lot of guns don't have
huge crews and they'll very quickly
surrender a very successful privateer is
the - a fast schooner prowling the Maine
coast
from the minute was launched it was a
very lucky ship I believe they had seven
voyages and actually 15 bounties
collected and so obviously on more than
one tour they would they would be able
to get more than one ship the crewmen
wanted to be on there for the money but
also for the prestige it was a lucky
ship the dashes third captain is the
recently married John Porter while the
crew prepares the ship
Porter is bidding a lingering farewell
to his wife Lois the ship was ready
everybody was ready the captain wasn't
there he was with his new bride well
everybody's you know right fine no he
could understand lovey dovey but come on
we've got we've got business to do part
of their business was to accept a
challenge from a new privateer the
champlain to see which boat was faster
finally captain Porter boards the dash
living up to her name the - speeds so
far ahead that the Champlain's lookout
can barely spot her on the horizon then
a furious storm picks up fearing the
weather the Champlain turns back the -
does not back on shore the captain's
wife senses trouble
Lois and her family are in Portland and
you know it's a stormy stormy evening a
couple days after the the - is left but
there's a big wind that shakes the house
and there's a big crash in one of the
unoccupied parlors and then one Lois
goes into this parlor and from one of
the fireplaces a tile has fallen off and
it's a tile with Scripture written on it
and so she reaches down and in her heart
she she says the - is lost
the - never returns but over the years
tales are told by Maine natives of the -
reappearing out of the fog on windless
days stopping lobstermen dead in their
tracks with its sudden appearance
the people who have seen her say the
crew on deck looks like they are looking
into the fog trying to find out where
they are and and how best to get home
the - makes her most famous ghostly
return during World War two before a
pair of adulterous lovers
at one particular afternoon when the fog
was thick of the three in the bed alarms
went off like that that something had
breached the security of the harbor and
they sprang into action some of them
began to fire and one of those shells
landed right on the island where these
two by having their afternoon tryst well
you can imagine it scared the bejesus
out of them and they wondered what is
going on here they said they saw coming
out of the fog this ship and here I mean
there wasn't a bit of wind stirring
there was no air whatsoever and they
could hear
the sales luffing as she was sort of
coming about and as as she came about
they could see on the stern the name -
Freeport from a port further down the
coast sailing out of New York
the teaser takes advantage of the war of
1812 and becomes a privateer she heads
north of the coast
nova scotia was a british colony at that
time so we were sort of the nearest
british possession and had a very rich
sea trade which of course attracted the
attention of American privateer vessels
like teaser the teaser captures several
ships right outside of Nova Scotia's
Halifax harbor expressing a flair for
the dramatic the teasers Captain William
Dobson with his single ship declares a
blockade of Halifax the British merchant
men and warships accept the challenge
July 1st 1813 the teaser is surrounded
by British ships including a 74 gun
warship at this point
captain Dobson gives orders for the
defence of his ship to his brash first
lieutenant Frederick Johnson
there's crazy folklore about Hamlet says
suggested that he fought with a
hangman's noose around his neck the
newspaper reports use words like he had
the disposition of the devil he was I
was sort of not widely liked at a
terrible temper reports vary about what
happens next but all fingers point to
Johnson some say he carries hot coals
from the ship's galley
others say he uses a flintlock pistol
the result is the same
Johnson goes to the powder room and
deliberately ignites a fire while his
fellow sailors are still on board a
teaser erupted in a colossal explosion
her whole powder magazine grew up all at
once and it was just a spectacular
explosion to rip the whole deck of
teaser up and sent her mainmast crashing
into the water there were about 40 men
aboard teaser only seven on the survived
the explosion it's quite literally a
very explosive issue and a very
traumatic one during the war of 1812 and
one that has spawned generation after
generations of sightings of this ghost
ship the teaser made a most convincing
appearance to Jill and Paul Flynn two
residents of Mahone Bay Nova Scotia in
when all of a sudden we saw this
schooner out there and we talked about
it and it was in the form of a schooner
on fire burning and we then you know we
looked at each other and said no boy
that must be the teaser with her deck of
flame her cruel wailing the teaser
seemingly caught in an eddy of time a
current too strong to escape quickly
vanished
I kept saying oh I just can't believe
this we got to make sure other people
see this but there it was and living
coming I'll tell ya it was in the shape
of a ship and it was burning I don't
have an explanation all I know as I saw
what I saw as quickly as she appeared
she vanished the Flynn's still walk
along the shore of Mahone Bay with an I
turned out to see but have not seen the
ghost ship teaser again when we return a
boarding party finds the Mary Celeste
sailing aimlessly in the Atlantic
without a living soul so they had 39
minutes of light to get the ghost ship
ready to sail during the war of 1812 the
US Navy had just 17 warships but
commissioned more than 150 private
vessels to attack the British when they
seized the ship these privateers were
allowed to keep whatever Luke was on
board history's mysteries we'll be right
back here on the History Channel
we now return to ghost ships on
history's mysteries
despite technological advances in the
safety and reliability of transatlantic
steamship travel throughout the 19th
century
all mastered seven ships remain the most
popular way of traversing the oceans
and regardless of the experience of
their captains these large ships
continue to be lost in turbulent and
unpredictable storms
when a ship doesn't reach port its
owners and relatives of the crew and
passengers know almost certainly that
the unyielding forces of nature have
gained the upper hand
but when a ship is found without any
sign of the crew or even the slightest
hint of their fate
human nature is unable to let the
mystery rest
such a ship is the Mary Celeste May 1861
the Amazon the original name of the Mary
Celeste is launched from Spencer's
Island Nova Scotia on that very first
trip her captain dies
Stanley Spicer's grandfather Earl Spicer
is part of the crew on the cargo ship I
can remember him telling this at the
first sight they saw was the pride of
this young captain running down to see
what they had in the boat wanted return
she knew that her young husband was hid
the Amazon couldn't shake her bad luck
and while later the ship went over to
England and sailing in them in the
English Channel and it ran into a ship
in sanctum so one thing after another
there was tragedy all through its
existence
the ship changes hands several times one
owner perhaps seeking to change the look
of the ship changes her name from Amazon
to Mary Celeste the odds and tradition
are against it
in the Western world we call ship sheep
because they really have a personified
identity and for you to go mucking a
boat with the a day that ship you know a
lot of mariners think that's a very bad
idea
Thursday morning November 7th 1872
Captain Benjamin Briggs his wife Sarah
their two-year-old daughter Sofia and a
crew of seven set sail from New York
Harbor bound for Genoa Italy
their cargo is 1700 barrels of
industrial alcohol November is never a
good time to be sailing on the Atlantic
November 1872 turns out to be a
particularly bad time the reason we knew
the weather was bad was that ships were
arriving in the Port of New York in
November reported heavy seas gale force
winds it was a tough time in November
that year despite the inclement weather
things are shipshape for the first few
weeks of the journey
the logbook itself shows that everything
was fine up until November 24th and the
Mary Celeste is not alone on the wide
Atlantic Seas eight days after she
leaves New York
another double blasted Brigantine the de
Gracia also built in Nova Scotia leaves
the harbor bound for Europe like the
Mary Celeste
she carries ten people on the afternoon
of December 4th 1872 the lookout on the
Dei Gratia spies something in the
distance
they look at her with the spyglass kind
of see no one on board they're probably
very curious at that point they get
close enough to hail her but no one
responds captain David Morehouse of the
Dei Gratia sends his first mate Oliver de
veau and two others to inspect the
mysterious ship it probably had a very
eerie feeling you know you kind of
worried this vessel and here is me after
cabin my skylight is open that the cabin
door is open everything is wet not a
sign the ladies de veau returns to the
Dei Gratia and asks Captain Morehouse for
permission to sail the Mary Celeste 600
miles to Gibraltar and their claim the
salvage rights Morehouse says yes to Deveau .
He takes two men over to the Mary
Celeste and boards her at 4:00 in the
afternoon sundown is 4:39 so they had 39
minutes of light to get the ghost ship
ready to sail that's a gutsy guy. Deveau
succeeds in sailing the Mary Celeste
safely into Gibraltar the authorities
are immediately suspicious convinced
there has been foul play there is a
hearing generating 66 pages of testimony
the case makes headlines around the
world they don't believe the story
that's told by the people in the Dei Gratia. Clearly things don't add up the
ship has food water working sails a
working pump even a sewing machine and a
melodeon a 19th century version of a
portable piano. The cargo except for a
few broken barrels is secured in the
hole they've left behind tobacco oil
skins raincoats and the captain's log
what's missing are the sextant the
lifeboat and every human aboard the Mary
Celeste
Captain Briggs his wife two-year-old
daughter and the seven crewmen vanished
where did they go
a sword belonging to Captain Briggs is
found on the ship it looks like it might
be stained with blood some speculated
that perhaps pirates came aboard and
kidnapped the crew others thought an
arrangement between the captains of the
Mary Celeste and the Dei Gratia had
somehow gone sour which sparked a fight
the cabins were wet with salt water
perhaps there was a waterspout that
watched the people overboard without
proof of any wrongdoing on the part of
the crew of the de gracia the court
reluctantly grants a salvage award the
court in Gibraltar believed that they
were pirates and that they didn't want
them to profit so they came up with a
compromise they only awarded them a
little over eight thousand dollars on an
$80,000 ship and cargo over the years
the focus for a true solution to the
mysterious disappearance of all aboard
the Mary Celeste centers on the cargo
she had a cargo of industrial alcohol
which has very potent fumes and had had
a patch of rough weather and one of her
hatches had been pulled open probably to
vent the cargo and that may have sort of
created a sort of a very ominous
whooshing noise and a and a smell like
the ship was about to explode
and Mary Celeste's crew probably did a
temporary evacuation to let their ship
vent, fearing an explosion. The crew unrolled
the main peak halyard, which would give
them a line of at 300 feet long and
three inches in circumference and they
hooked the small boat onto them they
were towing along behind and it could be
that a gale came up at that point and
simply blew the ship away and it's it's
a kind of a chilling thought to think of
ten people in a small boat watching
their brig just sail away into the ocean
their chances of survival are nil at
that point it's estimated based on the
last location of the Mary Celeste in the
law dated November 25th and her location
when the Dei Gratia found her on December
4th that she sailed some three hundred
and seventy eight miles alone,
a ghostly presence on the open sea.
and as much as the simplest solution
makes sense
other tantalizing evidence suggests
another fate for the Mary Celeste the
first mates wife claims that on the
night of November 25th she had a dream
that said that her husband had been
murdered at sea
and she woke up screaming in the middle
of the night and she has no explanation
but believes very much that there was
immunity now interestingly his sea-chest
her husband sea-chest was found in it
was a letter he had started to his wife
on November 25th and had just abruptly
quit oh I think we will never know what
happened we can always keep guessing and
other people will be coming up with
probably more stories and more ideas but
as some writer said since you cannot
subpoena the dead it is impossible to
ever know
when we continue a five masted schooner
finds its final resting place in the
graveyard of the Atlantic so from the
very beginning it's got this appearance
this ghostly appearance. Elsewhere in the
world in 1872, in Denver German immigrant
Adolph Coors purchased a local bottling
company the beginning of his brewing
empire. In Washington, former slave
Frederick Douglass ran for Vice President
on the ticket of the Equal Rights Party
and in the American West Yellowstone was
established as the world's first
national park to search any time in
history use the world timeline at
History Channel.com
We now return to Ghost Ships on
History's Mysteries
A combination of nature's forces results
in difficult sailing conditions and
struggles sometimes vicious winds and
powerful currents off the curving coast
of North Carolina
the warm waters of the Gulf Stream
flowing north collide with the cold
waters of the North Atlantic creating
potentially deadly seas perhaps the most
dangerous area is found among the
shifting sands just off Cape Hatteras in
an area called diamond shores it became
widely known as a graveyard of the
Atlantic one ship stands out among the
more than 2,000 that have ended their
useful lives along the perilous coasts
the Carroll A. Deering. Hardly a year
passes that you don't see a story and
some of the newspapers around here about
the Ghost Ship of the Diamond Shoals
January 31st 1921: The rugged
coastline is nearly empty except for the
life-saving stations. Officials know the
history of lives lost along this stretch
of sea and establish remote outposts
staffed with brave men prepared to risk
their lives to save others
just after sunup at 6:30 a.m.
one station spies a ship.
Surfman C. P. Brady is stationed at
Hatteras Inlet and notes a schooner all
sails set stranded on the Diamond.
Four different life-saving crews attempt
to reach the ship through the tumultuous
waters
and they can't get closer than a quarter
mile to the ship and because it's still
shrouded and mist they can see that it
is a large screener they can see it has
five masts, but they can't identify the
name. The ship is discovered and there it
is just kind of sitting out there. So
from the very beginning it's got this
appearance this ghostly appearance. And
they saw no sign of life there had been
no indication of any kind of distress
signal so they had to go back to shore
and add to wait I think four days before
they could go out there and actually
identify the vessel when they do return
they learn that the ship is to Carroll A.
Deering but it's what they don't find
that is mystifying unexplainable and
ominous
there is not a soul on board the ship is
deserted
they seem to have vanished in a hurry
but the food is in the galley on the
stove on the table
and there's no evidence of what happened
the lifeboat is missing and there is a
ladder over the side but there is no
sign of the coolie
there are what some might call signs and
importance preceding the Carroll A.
Deering entry into the small club of
ghost ships at that time the captain and
part owner of the Deering was William
F. Merritt and his son S.E. Merritt was the
first mate on board and when they signed
down the crew Merritt stated that he did
not feel comfortable with the crew he
didn't like them and he did not look
forward to his voyage with them. September 1920 the Deering a cargo ship sets out
from Boston to Buenos Aires Argentina
with a load of coal.
but on their way south they stopped at
Lewes, Delaware
Captain Merritt says he's sick. Both he
and his son, the first mate, disembark. We
don't know if he really was sick or if
something else was going on but he gets
off the boat and a new captain gets on, a
Captain Wormell. The new captain takes the
ship safely to Buenos Aires and the
cargo is unloaded. Returning home empty
as ships are not always able to arrange
a return cargo they stop first in Rio de
Janeiro Brazil later reports state that
captain normal feels the same way about
the crew as did its previous captain
he shares these misgivings with fellow
sea captains in Rio and later in
Barbados but continues on
working their way up the Carolina coast
they pass light ship number 80 off Cape
Lookout the light ships are essentially
floating lighthouses a crew member hails
the light ship it is January 20th the
crew member mentioned that the Deering
had lost her anchors in a recent Gale
and would the master contact the Coast
Guard the master of the light ship
signal back that he could not do so
because his radio was was not
functioning properly but he would do
what he could to get the message out the
late ship master makes one crucial
observation about the sealers aboard the
Deering he commented that the crew that
he observed on deck seemed to lack
discipline seemed disorganized and were
most certainly not of Scandinavian
extraction. His exact words were "small
brown men of color" It's revealed later
during the inquiry that the original
crewmen were all from Scandinavia
the next time the Carroll A. Deering is
seen is through a spyglass on the
morning of the 31st of January she is
sitting amidst the sea and spray stuck
atop Diamond Shoals four days later a
captain of a salvage tug is the first to
order he finds no bodies no notes no
sign of anything except a hasty exit if
a body washed up people would have
figured out him word would have gotten
out that bodies washed up and people
would have figured out that they would
have probably have come from the Carroll
Deering but nobody's ever turned up
anywhere because of the mysterious
disappearance of the captain and crew
and the persistence of Captain Wormell's
daughter Lulu an investigation is
launched by the US State Department
A letter is written to all ports with an
American representative: "Reporting the
loss of the American schooner Carroll A.
Deering under circumstances which are at
least suspicious the department is
desirous of obtaining any information
possible regarding the present
whereabouts of any member of the crew of
either vessel in order to determine
whether or not there has been foul play".
No trace of the captain or crew turns up
most people still feel the fate of the
doomed crew was sealed not by some
supernatural cause but by man
I think what happened was that something
went wrong on the vessel whether it was
evening piracy illness I'm inclined to
think all of a sudden they're heading
for Diamond Shoals and they figured "We
better get out of here" The ships boats
were gone and I had been part of that
crew I probably would have won to get
him one of those boats in a hurry and
get away from there well they bet the
Gulfstream going offshore they've got
the southwest wind and stormy that time
going offshore and it seems to me that
it's entirely possible that they might
just have drifted to sea.
Despite years of searching and sifting
through the meager clues left behind no
one is able to solve the perplexing saga
of the missing crew the State Department
drops the case for lack of evidence
sometimes the bodies of those lost at
sea wash ashore sometimes they become
part of the Seas themselves the reasons
for the disappearance of the captain and
the crew that left the Carroll Deering a
ghost ship sailing alone to her demise
on Diamond Shoals remain unanswered
there are all these stories of seagulls
being on the rigging and the masts the
racket that the seagulls were making is
just an awful coffin II of bird noises
but that perhaps the birds and their
sorrowful cries were the spirits of the
sailors and the missing crew. When we
return, the trading vessel Joyita
sets out on a 40-hour trip in 1955 and
turns up six weeks later still afloat
but the entire crew is missing. A hundred
years after the event, people will still
be asking the question what ever did
really happen to the jory to the largest
schooner in history was the seven
mastered 400 foot Thomas W Lawson built
in 1902 in Massachusetts just five years
later she was destroyed in a storm most
of her crew members were killed
history's mysteries we'll be right back
here on the History Channel
the Tokelau Islands part of New Zealand
are administered from Apia Samoa about
270 miles away like many islands in the
region their economy is based on simple
natural resources coconuts and bananas
the oil of the coconut made from the
coconuts copra is a sought-after
commodity
in March 1955 a 69 foot fishing vessel
called the Joey toe sails into the small
harbour city of Apia Samoa this
one-of-a-kind boat has an interesting
history she was commissioned in 1931 by
a Hollywood director and may have been
the site of a starlets murder she was
also used by the US Navy during World
War two she was chartered in 1952 by a
seventh generation sea captain an
Englishman named Thomas Henry Miller
called dusty by his friends
Miller plans to use the joie de for
commercial tuna fishing in the South
Pacific
Terry Dunleavy remembers the first time
he saw the Joyita and its captain in
1954: And we met Dusty Miller and he
took us out fishing for a day on Joyita
and I thought what a wonderful little
ship it was. He was now on the threshold
of achieving something and making some
money and doing the things that he liked
doing; fishing and going to
going to sea. The life of a fisherman at
the mercy of the tides the weather and
the vagaries of an uncertain catch is
not easy
Miller wanders around the South Pacific
for three years, but both he and his boat
are having problems.
It was obviously in deteriorating condition
no one was really doing any
maintenance, it didn't go to sea at all
during that time. So it was a shadow of
its former self. Despite her condition
the Joyita and Miller are chartered by
the E. A. Coxon company to undertake a
trading trip from Apia, Samoa
to the Tokelau islands. There are staples
to deliver and raw materials to pick up.
Ten Tokelau Islanders also come aboard
as passengers. I have a very vivid
memory we knew that this charter had been arranged and the ship was due to sail on
a Sunday at noon it was still there when
I went to bed and I thought "Uh-oh,
something must be wrong" But when I woke
up in the morning it had gone.
The Joyita's cargo includes forty-four 150-pound bags of flour, fifteen 70-pound bags of sugar,
eleven 56-pound bags of rice, empty metal drums and lumber.
It was a small boat, basically a fishing boat, should
have carried 10 people at most and had
25 and was carrying a lot of cargo as
well and the reason for that was just
that there was no regular service. If
people wanted to travel they had to go on whatever boat happened to be going.
The trip should take just under 41 hours
Lloyd Webber is in the radio shack and
receives a message from the Tokelaus
that the Joyita had not arrived as
scheduled:
"No, no sign there Sir" That's when we
alerted Laucala Bay  "I think we've got a
missing vessel" and they were in the air
next-day. Giant Sunderland flying boats
take to the air in a massive air rescue
search it covers nearly half a million
square miles of ocean
I actually managed to get aboard one of
the Sunderland's and fly with them on
the search before I saw it a couple of
times but they turned out to be
Whitecaps
after nine days of searching and
tallying 163 hours of flying time the
hunt is called off the joy eat is given
up for lost along with all 25 people
aboard
nobody was found and I mean there comes
a time in any situation like that where
you say well look we've we've looked
everywhere where the ship is supposed to
be it must have gone down then on
November 10th five and a half weeks
after she left Apia the joie de is found
600 miles southwest of her destination
in the waters off the northern Fijian
Islands she's half submerged her
portside completely underwater the cargo
is mostly missing there's no sign of her
25 passengers the fresh food and water
for the passengers is still on board
the captain who found her said he didn't
see any logbooks charts messages nor any
indication of the fate of those on board
to me the CAD no mystery though it was
simply the fact that they set sail from
a pier they sail north all that day all
that night and the next day and then
disaster strikes and we have no
transcript we have no record we know
nothing about what they did what they
said during that time and that's that's
quite a large mystery to my face
the Jowita is thoroughly examined and
photographed they find four mattresses
thrown over the engines the radio is
tuned to the distress frequency 2182
and yet no distress signal was ever
heard she is pumped dry and towed to
Suva Fiji a commission is appointed to
conduct an official inquiry they choose
to separate the casualty of the ship
from the casualty of the passengers they
report in detail the problems on the
ship throughout its fateful journey
including a deteriorating engine
fractured pipes that cause a leakage
rate of two thousand gallons of water in
our broken pumps and a broken radio
antenna but in the matter of the
casualty of all passengers after nearly
two months and three hundred pages of
testimony the official inquiry states
they must regard the fate of the
passengers and crew as inexplicable on
the evidence submitted at the inquiry
there are no answers only more questions
the biggest one being why did they leave
the ship
must have been terrifying for them the
Sun would have set on that night
something like 620 and we know that the
boat was taking on water quite a
considerable rate but everything
happened during the night I'm myself
convinced that they left the ship
voluntarily hastily men in poor order
because they thought it was going to get
sighs others maintain that dusty Miller
who had once bragged to the appia harbor
master that the joie de was unsinkable
would have never left his ship
my first thing is that something
obviously happened to dusty miller
because he would have known that the
ship would never sink and and he would
have never have left it because he would
have more than anybody else would have
known that they'll be out looking for us
they'll send our airplanes and send our
chips the best thing you can do is stay
with the ship the crew may have believed
an SOS was sent out the radio was found
to have been sent to the proper
frequency the distress message they
thought they had sent or wish to have
sent would have said we're 35 miles
south of the token Islands we are
abandoning ship place in help had they
done that a Sunderland would have flown
up from Fiji the next morning and in all
probability rescue
not a single trace of the passengers has
ever surfaced what could possibly have
lured Miller and the other 24 passengers
away from what was perhaps their best
chance of survival even with no engines
and no power
theories range from waterspouts to
Japanese fishermen fearful of
competition to Russian submarines to
UFOs
some claim that dusty Miller was a
communist working for the Soviet Union
I guess you could say that the jointer
is the South Pacific
Marisa list unless someone comes forward
the truth of the Jowita and the fate of
her 25 Souls will remain a mystery of
the sea another ghost ship with a
missing crew lost forever to the world
forty-five years later I still ask
myself what what happened we don't know
in 1998 Prince Edward spotted an old
schooner bearing an uncanny resemblance
to a famous British ghost ship that had
been sunk in 1878 and Edwards
great-grandfather King George had a
similar experience he was a 16 year old
naval cadet when he wrote this ominous
entry in his logbook at 4:00 a.m. the
flying dutchman crossed our bounds the
future King of England was sure he had
spotted the most famous ghost ship of
all to discover more about this and
every history's mysteries topic at
History Channel com
I'm Arthur Kent for the History Channel
thanks for watching
supersonic jets laser-guided missiles
computer enhanced controls these are the
modern rules of dogfighting but the
tactics were born out of World War one
using state-of-the-art computer
animation of experience to battle
dog fights the greatest air battles
tonight at 8:00 on the History Channel